XML
File type that stands for Extensible Markup Language
HML is structured very similarly to HTML
Generally used for configuration
is human-readable and machine readable

Cloud Computing - a virtual service that gives the user computing power, storage and elastic functions
ex.  amazon web services, azure, dropbox, google cloud platform

Problems with local computing:
1. Companies need to invest their own resources into servers, computers, etc.
2. Costs a lot of money
3. Risk of not enough resources or wasted money on unused resources
4. Limited collaboration capability

Cloud Computing exists to alleviate of these costs and risks
On-demand payment and use.
Elastic - can changes the computing power/storage/etc. as needed

4 Types of Cloud Platforms
1. Private Cloud - used by a company who doesn't want their resources to be utilized for the public
2. Public Cloud - accessible by the public for all sorts of different functions
3. Hybrid Cloud - a mix of both Private and Public Cloud qualities
4. Multi-Cloud - have both public and private clouds to disperse resources more efficiently and potentially save money

Different functions that a cloud is capable of offering (*aaS)
IaaS - Infrastructure as a Service (access to the house plans and adjust them as desired)
	Gives the user the ability to access physical and virtual servers, storage systems, re-configure things to their liking
PaaS - Platform as a Service (have access to the house and all functions but cannot make adjustments)
	On-demand access to cloud-hosted applications
	can develop, run, and configure programs, store data, maintain, and manage applications
SaaS - Software as a Service (access to a specific room of the house and all functions of that room and can rent them out individually)
	on-demand, ready to use software
FaaS - Function as a Service (can rent out only certain appliances of a room)
	still new in development
	only utilizes specific functions of an application as they are needed

AWS - Amazon Web Services
	- publicly released in 2004
	Functions:
		1. Short-term and long-term data storage
		2. Elastic computing resources
		3. Data management systems
		4. Allows for Big Data analysis
		5. Adaptible to company needs
	- has over 200 different services
		S3 - storage
		EC2 - elastic computing
		DBS - cloud databases
		EMR - elastic mapreduce

AWS Structure
Divided into regions
	- Cluster of data centers in a specific area of the world
	ex. us-east-2
	Reason to selecting a region bases on a few criteria
	1. Pricing
	2. Local and company law
	3. Services they provide
	4. Proximity
	Regions are divided Availability Zones
	- one or more data centers that contain redundant information
	- redundancy creates fault tolerance
	- 2-6 availability zones per region
	Edge Locations
	- data center or point of presense
	- over 300 of them worldwide
	- 84 availability zones across 42 countries
	- Data center locations are often remote

Amazon S3 - Simple Storage Service
-a Cloud storage tool
- has very strong data durability (99.999999% protection against any harm to your data)
- offers multiple different types of storage depending on access and price
- stores "object" in "buckets" (like files in a directory)
	- a bucket must have a unique name 
		- 3-63 characters, no underscores, capital letters
		ex. my-bucket5
			s3://my-bucket5/my-object
			23://my-bucket5/Subdirectory/my-object
Replication:
Root user can configure data replication options
1. Cross Region Replicaiton
2. Single Region Replication

S3 Storage Options:
- S3 Standard
- S3 Standard Infrequent Access
	minimum amount of time for storage (good for short projects)
	cheaper than standard storage
- S3 One-Zone IA
	can only be accessed from one availability zone
	cheaper than Standard Infrequent Access
- S3 Glacier
	Very long-term storage (90 days)
	cheaper than Standard IA
	takes more time to retrieve info (up to 12 hours)
- S3 Glacier Deep Archive
	Very long-term storage (180 days)
	Cheaper than Glacier
	Takes a significant amount of time to retrieve data (2-3 days max)

Encryption - a means of keeping data away from people who might have unauthorized access
- works off a cipher to scramble text
	ex. ABC -> DEF
-the cipher is determined by the encryption key
-Two Types of Encryption
	1. Server-Side Encryption
		-AWS encrypts the data and manages the keys
	2. Client-Side Encryption
		- the Client manually encrypts the data and keeps the key before sending info to the cloud

EC2 - Elastic Cloud Compute - provides adapatible, and resizable computing power
	based on what are called "instances"
		upload a program to an EC2 instance, and the instance will run until you ask it to stop
EC2 Consists of 
	1. Virtual Machine
	2. Storage Data
	3. Auto-Scaling
-pricing:
	Spot Instance - send a request for computing power, price, and availability zone
	- the request is fullfilled by Amazon when the space becomes available
	Reserved Instance - pay a little more to reserve computing capacity over a period of time
	- must pay the capacity for as long as it is reserved
	- can last up to 3 years
	Dedicated Host - a physical server that contains EC2 instance capacity completely under your control
	- make sure to address compliance with company/local policy
	-saves money on licensing costs
	On-Demand Instance
	- EC2 is run on a private cloud for a single customer
	- physically isolated to keep it safe from outsiders

EMR - Elastic Map Reduce